README.md, before:

# Collaborative Git Exercise

The goal of this exercise is to collaborate on a simple project on GitHub as a team of 2 or 3.

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [Application](#application)
  - [Tips](#tips)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [End result](#end-result)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
- [Delivery](#delivery)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [`You have an error in your SQL syntax [...] near BY`](#you-have-an-error-in-your-sql-syntax--near-by)
  - [`Uncaught PDOException [...] Access denied`](#uncaught-pdoexception--access-denied)
  - [`Invalid argument supplied for foreach()`](#invalid-argument-supplied-for-foreach)
  - [Adding a todo item redirects to another URL](#adding-a-todo-item-redirects-to-another-url)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->



## Application

This repository contains a partially implemented todo list written in PHP, HTML and CSS.
The application connects to a MySQL database.
All the code is in the `index.php` file.

The incomplete lines of code are marked with the following comment: `// IMPLEMENT ME`.

### Tips

* You may run this application on your local machine with [MAMP][mamp] or [WAMP][wamp], or with a local installation of PHP and MySQL if you already have them.
* This repository contains a `todolist.sql` file you can use to create the database for this project.

  If you use MAMP, you can run its contents from MAMP's phpMyAdmin interface.
* You can update the [constants at the top of `index.php`][ex-constants] to match your local installation:
  * The value of `BASE_URL` must match the URL at which the application is available.

    For example, if you use MAMP and put this repository in MAMP's `htdocs` directory,
    the application will be accessible at http://localhost:8888/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/ (with the default ports).
    In this situation, the value of `BASE_URL` should be `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`.
  * You can change the value of `DB_PORT` to match your local MySQL port (for example, with MAMP, the default is 8889).



## Instructions

The first two team members will be referred to as **Bob** and **Alice**.

1. **Bob**
   * Open the [MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise repository][ex-repo] in your browser.
   * Click the **`Fork`** button in the top-right corner of the page (you must be logged in to GitHub).

     ![Fork](images/fork.png)

     This will create a copy of the repository on GitHub that belongs to you (under your GitHub username instead of `MediaComem`).
   * In the settings of that repository, add **Alice** and any other team members to the list of **Collaborators** (this will give them push access).
   * Clone the repository on your local machine.
2. **Alice** (and other team members)
   * Clone Bob's repository on your local machine.
3. **All**
   * Implement one or more missing feature.
   * Commit the change and push it to Bob's repository on GitHub.



## End result

The fully implemented application should look and behave like this:
https://comem-archidep-php-todolist.herokuapp.com



## Evaluation

* The work must be delivered in the forked repository on GitHub.
* The todo list must work.
  * Tasks can be added, toggled and deleted.
  * Tasks must be listed from newest to oldest (i.e. by descending creation date).
* Each team member must contribute at least one useful commit.
  * The commits must be made on each team member's machine using their local Git
    installation, not through GitHub's web interface.
  * The author name and email address of each team member's commits must be correctly configured.
* Commit messages must be relevant (i.e. describe the change that was made).



## Delivery

Send one email per team to the teacher with:

* The link to the team's solution repository on GitHub.
* The list of team members (and their GitHub username if it is not obvious).



## Troubleshooting

> Note that PHP errors may appear only in your PHP error log, or also in your
> browser. Whether they appear in your browser depends on parameters in your
> `php.ini` configuration, such as
> [`error_reporting`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/errorfunc.configuration.php#ini.error-reporting).

### `You have an error in your SQL syntax [...] near BY`

The `todolist.sql` file contains the following query:

```sql
CREATE USER IF NOT EXISTS 'todolist'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'chAngeMeN0w!';
```

The `WITH mysql_native_password` portion of this query is required for some
older versions of MySQL. If you get a syntax error message when you run it,
simply remove that part and use only `IDENTIFIED BY`.

### `Uncaught PDOException [...] Access denied`

If you see an error that looks like this displayed in your browser or in the PHP
error log:

```
PHP Fatal error:
  Uncaught PDOException: SQLSTATE[HY000] [1045]
  Access denied for user 'todolist'@'localhost' (using password: YES)
```

It means that you are not using the correct database connection parameters. Make
sure that the following parameters are configured correctly:

* The `DB_PASS` parameter must be the password you used when you created the
  `todolist` user with the SQL in the `todolist.sql` file.
* The `DB_PORT` parameter must be the port on which you MySQL server is
  listening. The default MySQL port is 3306, but it may be different depending
  on your installation method. For example, MAMP uses port 8888 by default.

> You may also have made a mistake when creating the MySQL user. If you are not
> sure, you can delete the user by running the query `DROP USER
> 'todolist'@'localhost';`, then re-run the `CREATE USER ...` and `GRANT ALL
> PRIVILEGES ...` queries of the `todolist.sql` file.

### `Invalid argument supplied for foreach()`

If you see an error that looks like this displayed in your browser or in the PHP
error log:

```
PHP Warning: Invalid argument supplied for foreach()
```

It is simply because you have not yet implemented the `SELECT` query in the
`$selectQuery` variable. This makes the `$items` variable empty, which produces
an error in the `foreach` loop which attempts to iterate over it to display the
todo items.

### Adding a todo item redirects to another URL

You have not configured the `BASE_URL` parameter correctly. This value is used
in the [form's `action`
attribute](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_form_action.asp) when creating a
todo item.

The correct value is the base path under which the application is exposed. For
example, if you are accessing the application at
`http://localhost:8888/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`, then `BASE_URL`
should be `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`. If you are accessing the
application at `http://localhost:8888`, then `BASE_URL` should be `/`.



[ex-constants]: https://github.com/MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/blob/master/index.php#L3-L8
[ex-repo]: https://github.com/MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise
[mamp]: https://www.mamp.info/
[wamp]: http://www.wampserver.com/

Commit message:

Add troubleshooting for missing trailing slash

README.md, after:

# Collaborative Git Exercise

The goal of this exercise is to collaborate on a simple project on GitHub as a team of 2 or 3.

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [Application](#application)
  - [Tips](#tips)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [End result](#end-result)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
- [Delivery](#delivery)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [`You have an error in your SQL syntax [...] near BY`](#you-have-an-error-in-your-sql-syntax--near-by)
  - [`Uncaught PDOException [...] Access denied`](#uncaught-pdoexception--access-denied)
  - [`Invalid argument supplied for foreach()`](#invalid-argument-supplied-for-foreach)
  - [Adding a todo item redirects to another URL](#adding-a-todo-item-redirects-to-another-url)
  - [The application displays correctly but modifications are not taken into account](#the-application-displays-correctly-but-modifications-are-not-taken-into-account)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->



## Application

This repository contains a partially implemented todo list written in PHP, HTML and CSS.
The application connects to a MySQL database.
All the code is in the `index.php` file.

The incomplete lines of code are marked with the following comment: `// IMPLEMENT ME`.

### Tips

* You may run this application on your local machine with [MAMP][mamp] or [WAMP][wamp], or with a local installation of PHP and MySQL if you already have them.
* This repository contains a `todolist.sql` file you can use to create the database for this project.

  If you use MAMP, you can run its contents from MAMP's phpMyAdmin interface.
* You can update the [constants at the top of `index.php`][ex-constants] to match your local installation:
  * The value of `BASE_URL` must match the URL at which the application is available.

    For example, if you use MAMP and put this repository in MAMP's `htdocs` directory,
    the application will be accessible at http://localhost:8888/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/ (with the default ports).
    In this situation, the value of `BASE_URL` should be `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`.
  * You can change the value of `DB_PORT` to match your local MySQL port (for example, with MAMP, the default is 8889).



## Instructions

The first two team members will be referred to as **Bob** and **Alice**.

1. **Bob**
   * Open the [MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise repository][ex-repo] in your browser.
   * Click the **`Fork`** button in the top-right corner of the page (you must be logged in to GitHub).

     ![Fork](images/fork.png)

     This will create a copy of the repository on GitHub that belongs to you (under your GitHub username instead of `MediaComem`).
   * In the settings of that repository, add **Alice** and any other team members to the list of **Collaborators** (this will give them push access).
   * Clone the repository on your local machine.
2. **Alice** (and other team members)
   * Clone Bob's repository on your local machine.
3. **All**
   * Implement one or more missing feature.
   * Commit the change and push it to Bob's repository on GitHub.



## End result

The fully implemented application should look and behave like this:
https://comem-archidep-php-todolist.herokuapp.com



## Evaluation

* The work must be delivered in the forked repository on GitHub.
* The todo list must work.
  * Tasks can be added, toggled and deleted.
  * Tasks must be listed from newest to oldest (i.e. by descending creation date).
* Each team member must contribute at least one useful commit.
  * The commits must be made on each team member's machine using their local Git
    installation, not through GitHub's web interface.
  * The author name and email address of each team member's commits must be correctly configured.
* Commit messages must be relevant (i.e. describe the change that was made).



## Delivery

Send one email per team to the teacher with:

* The link to the team's solution repository on GitHub.
* The list of team members (and their GitHub username if it is not obvious).



## Troubleshooting

> Note that PHP errors may appear only in your PHP error log, or also in your
> browser. Whether they appear in your browser depends on parameters in your
> `php.ini` configuration, such as
> [`error_reporting`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/errorfunc.configuration.php#ini.error-reporting).

### `You have an error in your SQL syntax [...] near BY`

The `todolist.sql` file contains the following query:

```sql
CREATE USER IF NOT EXISTS 'todolist'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'chAngeMeN0w!';
```

The `WITH mysql_native_password` portion of this query is required for some
older versions of MySQL. If you get a syntax error message when you run it,
simply remove that part and use only `IDENTIFIED BY`.

### `Uncaught PDOException [...] Access denied`

If you see an error that looks like this displayed in your browser or in the PHP
error log:

```
PHP Fatal error:
  Uncaught PDOException: SQLSTATE[HY000] [1045]
  Access denied for user 'todolist'@'localhost' (using password: YES)
```

It means that you are not using the correct database connection parameters. Make
sure that the following parameters are configured correctly:

* The `DB_PASS` parameter must be the password you used when you created the
  `todolist` user with the SQL in the `todolist.sql` file.
* The `DB_PORT` parameter must be the port on which you MySQL server is
  listening. The default MySQL port is 3306, but it may be different depending
  on your installation method. For example, MAMP uses port 8888 by default.

> You may also have made a mistake when creating the MySQL user. If you are not
> sure, you can delete the user by running the query `DROP USER
> 'todolist'@'localhost';`, then re-run the `CREATE USER ...` and `GRANT ALL
> PRIVILEGES ...` queries of the `todolist.sql` file.

### `Invalid argument supplied for foreach()`

If you see an error that looks like this displayed in your browser or in the PHP
error log:

```
PHP Warning: Invalid argument supplied for foreach()
```

It is simply because you have not yet implemented the `SELECT` query in the
`$selectQuery` variable. This makes the `$items` variable empty, which produces
an error in the `foreach` loop which attempts to iterate over it to display the
todo items.

### Adding a todo item redirects to another URL

You have not configured the `BASE_URL` parameter correctly. This value is used
in the [form's `action`
attribute](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_form_action.asp) when creating a
todo item.

The correct value is the base path under which the application is exposed. For
example, if you are accessing the application at
`http://localhost:8888/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`, then `BASE_URL`
should be `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`. If you are accessing the
application at `http://localhost:8888`, then `BASE_URL` should be `/`.

### The application displays correctly but modifications are not taken into account

You may have configured your `BASE_URL` without a trailing slash (e.g.
`/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise` instead of
`/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/`).

The Apache web server (in MAMP or equivalent) will not treat requests to those
two paths in the same way:

* The first path `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise` will probably be redirected
  to `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/` with a standard Apache configuration.
  Any form data submitted in the request will be lost in the redirection.
* The second path `/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/` refers to the directory
  by the same name. In that case, a standard Apache configuration will probably
  execute the `index.php` page in that directory.

Without the trailing slash, your application may display correctly, but form
submission may be broken.



[ex-constants]: https://github.com/MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise/blob/master/index.php#L3-L8
[ex-repo]: https://github.com/MediaComem/comem-archidep-php-todo-exercise
[mamp]: https://www.mamp.info/
[wamp]: http://www.wampserver.com/
